---
title: "Voltage-based STDP and inhibitory plasticity cooperate to improve stimulus coding in a model of V1 simple-cells"
collection: talks
type: "Poster"
permalink: /talks/2012-03-01-talk-1
venue: "Bernstein Conference"
date: 2018-10-01
location: "Berlin, Germany"
---

The discovery of orientation-selective receptive fields in the primary visual cortex has led to the question how distinctive selective neuronal responses emerges. Previous studies addressed this question using spike-timing dependent plasticity (STDP) rules combined with normative learning paradigms, such as maximizing information transmission or optimizing sparseness. Despite their success in replicating the receptive fields shapes observed in experimental data, it remains unclear how well the resulting dynamics of self-organization and population coding match neural processing in vivo. This issue is of particular interest, as numerous experimental studies have recently demonstrated a substantial impact of inhibition in cortical processing. To fill this gap, we implemented a spiking neural network model of V1-layer 4, consisting of excitation and inhibition circuits, stimulated with natural scene patches converted to Poisson spike trains. Neural plasticity of excitatory synapses is based on a phenomenological voltage-based triplet STDP rule, while plasticity in inhibitory synapses follows a phenomenological, symmetric inhibitory STDP rule. We analyzed in detail how inhibition influences the emergence of selectivity and efficient population coding. For this purpose, we adjusted the strength of inhibition and analyzed its impact on image encoding and structural properties. At the level of population responses to visual stimuli, we show that stronger inhibition sharpens tuning curves, decorrelates responses, improves information transmission and leads to the contrast invariant of tuning curves. At the structural level, we show how the development of simple-cell receptive fields is accompanied by the emergence of a functional connectivity pattern. In summary, our results demonstrate how inhibition improves the efficient stimulus coding based on strictly phenomenological plasticity rules, and characterize the role of inhibition in shaping response dynamics.
